I would recommend that you read the "Enemy Stat Generation" page first.

Some Valni / Lagdou / Skirmish enemies have a little extra randomization sprinkled on top of normal enemy stat generation. There are three additional settings. Based on their FEBuilder names:

* "Special" enemies have slightly random starting positions. From their base starting position, they can move up to one square (octo-directionally) from it.
* "Monster" enemies have slightly random class, level, held items, and droppable items.
* "ItemDrop" enemies drop their bottom held item (this is always how droppable items are flagged, even on enemies in real maps).

Enemies can have any combination of these attributes, although take note of the interaction between "Monster" and "ItemDrop." If "Monster" randomizes a droppable item, that will be the only thing dropped by the enemy, whether or not they have "ItemDrop."

When loading a Valni / Lagdou map, this is what happens:

1. One RN is rolled to determine how many "Special" enemies move one square from their starting position. The result seems to be hard-coded based on the number of Special enemies, rather than derived from a formula.
2. RNs are rolled to determine which "Special" enemies move, based on the results from Step 1.
3. Enemies are generated based on their position in memory.


When picking [x] Special enemies to move, this is what happens:

1. Special enemies are put in a list according to the order they appear in memory.
2. An RN is rolled, normalized to the length of this list. The enemy in that position on the list is flagged to move.
    It's possible that the enemy was *already* flagged to move, in which case nothing happens.
3. Step 2 is repeated until [x] enemies have been flagged.

This means that the number of RNs burned in this step is indeterminate, since it continues until it gets a certain number of *unique* rolls, but does nothing to prevent itself from getting duplicate rolls. So the number of RNs burned = [x] + [number of duplicates], which could be anything.


When generating enemies, the following steps are taken in this order:

1. If the enemy is "Monster," roll 1 RN to determine its class. This is based on the Monster Spawn rates table in FEBuilder, and the unit's Class value from the Unit placer.
2. If the enemy is "Monster," roll 1 RN to determine its level. Not sure how this works exactly yet TBH because I kinda don't care.
(The next 3 steps will be gibberish -- check the Monster Item Rates editor in FEBuilder for them to make sense)
3. If the enemy is "Monster," roll 1 RN to pick the Equipped Item table based on class.
4. If the enemy is "Monster," roll 1 RN to pick the exact based on the associated Item Chances table.
4. If the enemy is "Monster", roll 1 RN to pick the Dropped Item table based on class.
5. If the enemy is "Monster" and the dropped item table is not 0, roll 1 RN to determine the dropped item based on the associated Item Chances table.
6. Do normal stat generation as described in the Enemy Stat Generation page.
7. If the enemy is "Special" and was picked to move, roll 1 RN, normalized from 0 to 7, to determine how they move.
    0 = Up and Left
    1 = Up
    2 = Up and Right
    3 = Left
    4 = Right
    5 = Down and Left
    6 = Down
    7 = Right

So, in addition to the normal 0-42 RNs for stat generation, we get:
5-6 extra RNs if the enemy is "Monster" (depending on if they rolled a droppable item).
0-1 extra RN if the enemy is "Special" (depending on if they were picked to move).